**Find the Maxima and Minima of an Equation**

Extrema of a function are the maximum and minimum points. Maxima and
minima are the highest and lowest values of a function within a set of
ranges. The largest value of the function in the full range is called
the absolute maximum, and the smallest value is called the absolute
minimum, while the least value is known as the absolute minima. Other
peaks and minima of a function are known as local maxima and minima, and
they are not the absolute maxima and minima of the function. Let's take
a closer look at local maxima and minima, absolute maxima and minima,
and how to calculate the function's maximum and minima.

**Maxima and Minima Points:**

The place in a given interval where the values of the function near that
point are always less than the value of the function at that point is
known as a local maxima. Local minima, on the other hand, are points
where the function's values around that point are bigger than the
function's value at that point.

**Maxima and Minima properties:**

If f(x) is a continuous function in its domain, then there should be at
least one maximum and one minimum between equal values of f(x) .

The maxima and minima alternate. In other words, there is one minimum
between two maxima and vice versa.

If f(x) approaches infinity as x approaches an or b, and f\'(x) = 0 for
exactly one value x, namely c between a and b, then f(c) is the lowest
and least value. If f(x) tends to -- as x tends to an or b, f(c) is the
greatest and most extreme value.

**Maxima and Minima Examples:**

**Example 1:** Find the points of maxima and minima of a function:

y = 2x^3^ -- 3x^2^ + 6

**Solution**

Given function: y = 2x^3^ -- 3x^2^ + 6

Using the second order derivative test to find a function's maximum and
minimum:

Taking the first derivative of:

y = 2x^3^ -- 3x^2^ + 6 ----- (eq 1)

Differentiate both sides (eq 1), w.r.t x.

⇒ dy/dx = d(2x^3^)/dx -- d(3x^2^)/dx + d(6)/dx

⇒ dy/dx = 6x^2^ -- 6x + 0

⇒ dy / dx = 6x^2^ -- 6x .... (eq 2)

To find crucial points, put dy/dx = 0.

⇒ 6x^2^ -- 6x = 0

⇒ 6x (x -- 1) = 0

⇒ x = 0,1

The critical points are 0 & 1.

Differentiating both sides in eqn 2 w.r.t x.

⇒ d^2^y/dx^2^ = d(6x^2^)/dx -- d(6x)/dx

⇒ d^2^y/dx^2^ = 12x -- 6

Put the x values together and obtain the maximum or minimum value.

At x = 0, d^2^y/dx^2^ = 12(0) -- 6 = -6 \< 0, hence x = 0 is a point of
maxima

At x = 1, d^2^y/dx^2^ = 12(1) -- 6 = 6 \> 0, hence x = 1 is a point of
minima

The function's maximum value is x = 0 and its minimum value is x = 1.

**Example 2:** Using the maxima and minima formulas, find the extrema
and extremum value of the preceding function: f(x) = -3x^2^ + 4x + 7.

**Solution:**

Using the second order derivative test to find a function's maximum and
minimum:

Given function: f(x) = -3x^2^ + 4x + 7 ---------------- (eq 1)

On both sides of (eq 1), differentiate w.r.t x.

⇒ dy/dx = d(-3x^2^)/dx + d(4x)/dx + d(7)/dx

⇒ dy/dx = -- 6x + 4

dy/dx = 0 helps find critical points.

⇒ -6x + 4 = 0 -------(eq 2)

⇒x = 2/3

The critical point is 2/3.

w.r.t. x, differentiate both sides of (eq 2)

⇒ d^2^y/dx^2^ = d(-6x)/dx + d(4)/dx

⇒ d^2^y/dx^2^ = -6

Since d^2^y/dx^2^ \< 0, the given curve will have maxima at x = 2/3.

At x = 2/3, the maximum value of f(x) is

f(2/3) = -3(2/3)

2 + 4(2/3) + 7 = -4/3 + 8/3 + 7 = 25/3

The maxima of the function is at x = 2/3 and maximum value is 25/3.

Saddle points are critical points of a function where the function\'s
gradient (first derivative) is zero, but the second derivative test
fails to classify them as either maxima or minima. Geometrically, at a
saddle point, the function resembles a saddle shape.

In more detail, at a saddle point, the function has a flat tangent plane
in some directions and slopes upwards in others. This behavior makes
saddle points neither maximum nor minimum points. Instead, they
represent points of inflection, where the function changes concavity.

Mathematically, a saddle point occurs when the second derivative (or its
equivalent in higher dimensions) changes sign along different
directions. This change in concavity indicates that the function neither
has a local maximum nor a local minimum at that point.

In the context of optimization, saddle points can pose challenges
because they can slow down convergence or mislead optimization
algorithms. However, they also provide valuable information about the
function\'s behavior, especially in complex systems with multiple
variables.
